- 👋 Hi, I’m @Bhagy86
- 👀 I’m interested in summarizing ...
- Collaboration in collaborative learning Michael J. Baker Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique & Telecom ParisTech, France This paper presents a theorisation of collaborative activity that was developed in the research field known as “collaborative learning”, in order to understand the processes of co-elaboration of meaning and knowledge. Collaboration, as distinguished from cooperation, coordination and collective activity, is defined as a continued and conjoined effort towards elaborating a “joint problem space” of shared representations of the problem to be solved. An approach to analysing the processes of co-construction of a joint problem space is outlined, in terms of inter-discursive operations, together with approaches to defining different forms of cooperative activity. In conclusion, the specificity of this approach to defining collaboration is discussed in relation to other fields of research. Keywords: collaboration; cooperation; coordination; collective activity; dialogue; learning; knowledge elaboration; argumentation . Introduction Collaborative activities have been studied across many scientific disciplines, for a diversity of reasons. These include understanding human social and cognitive development from early infancy (Vygotsky, 1978), analysing shared problem solving (Roschelle & Teasley, 1995), analysing collective work (Schmidt, 1994), studying specific psychological processes such as collaborative remembering (Edwards & Middleton, 1986), and trying to understand what differentiates humans from other primates (Hamann, et al., 2011). In computer science, models of collaborative action and communication have been developed as a basis for designing more effective human-machine interaction systems (Grosz & Sidner, 1990) and computer-based shared workspaces (e.g. Dourish & Bellotti, 1992). Given such a diversity of aims in studying collaboration across disciplines, and the fact that scientific concepts are forged within specific research programmes, the question arises as to whether there could be a coherent and operational trans-disciplinary theory and model of collaboration. In order to contribute to such an investigation, this paper describes a particular theorisation of collaborative activity

 Michael J. Baker elaborated in the field known as “collaborative learning” (henceforth abbreviated to “CL”) (Dillenbourg, et al., 1996; Dillenbourg, 1999a, 1999b)1, including the part of that field concerned with the role of technology mediation, called “computer supported collaborative learning” (henceforth abbreviated to “CSCL”)2. In that context, the motivation for elaborating an operational definition of collaborative activity is to try to understand the types of processes at work in groups of students that (dis)favour learning. This is important for interpreting experimental results, as well as for designing educational situations based on CL and CSCL. After presenting characteristics of situations studied in CL, and a first definition of collaboration, distinguishing it from cooperation, coordination and collective activity, I describe a particular model of collaboration (Baker, 1994, 1995), situated within an analysis of forms of cooperation (Baker, 2002b), based on interdiscursive transformations of knowledge and understanding. By way of conclusion, I discuss the domain-specificity of the way that collaboration is theorised in CL research. . Collaborative learning research: Situations, cooperation and collaboration Collaborative learning research emerged in the 1970s, for practical reasons (for example, scarce resources such as computers had to be shared between students) and as a reaction to psychological and education approaches centred on the individual learner. Further motivations for focussing on group processes related to changes in society that emphasised the need to learn to work with others in and out of school – especially in an increasingly globalised world, fuelled by Internet technologies – and changes in authority structures on a societal level that allowed the students’ voices3 to be heard in the classroom. This paper focuses very . This short paper focuses specifically on the way in which the concept of collaboration has been defined in the domain of collaborative learning research, and therefore does not provide a review of this domain itself, for which references to research syntheses and specific studies are given in the present text. . See, for example, the International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning: http://ijcscl.org . Throughout this paper, notwithstanding developmental differences, the term “student” will be used in the general sense of “learner”, a person acting in a situation that is designed to favour learning, referring without distinction to primary school children, secondary school pupils, university students or even older adults

Collaboration in collaborative learning  specifically on the way that “collaboration” has been defined in the field of CL, and therefore reviews research in the field only to the extent that it contributes to the main focus here. References to general research syntheses and specific research are given throughout the paper. Early research on CL focussed on trying to identify the conditions under which working together (e.g. in pairs) was most effective, for example in comparison with working alone: when are ‘two heads better than one’ (e.g. Azmitia, 1988; Mullins, Rummel & Spada, 2011)? As might be predicted, whether working together is more effective, in terms of quality of problem solutions and learning outcomes, depends on other variables, such as the type of task, the age of participants, the number of members in the group, differences in prior knowledge and gender (e.g. Joiner & Littleton, 2013). Thus, it became recognised that results were difficult to generalise beyond specific tasks (Dillenbourg, et al., 1996). What has become known as the “interactions paradigm” addressed this problem by searching for dominant frequencies of ‘types’ of interactions between students (e.g. more or less explanatory, conflictual, argumentative, taskfocussed, etc.), treated as intermediary variables that could explain why some groups functioned and learned better than others. All this required a theoretical model of collaboration, in order to avoid choosing interaction categories in an ad hoc manner, and also as a basis for designing collaborative educational technologies. . General characteristics of group work in learning situations Before proceeding, it is necessary to state a few assumptions about what (potentially) collaborative situations are considered to be in CL research, that are so widely assumed that they are rarely made explicit (but cf. Dillenbourg, 1999b), but which need to be stated here in order to clarify the scope of the theorisation of collaboration in CL research. Firstly, students working together are assumed to be equals, in terms of their statuses and rights to intervene in the interaction, although they are rarely equals in terms of prior knowledge and other relevant social and cognitive characteristics. Each has the social status of “student”. This apparently simple condition effectively excludes from consideration as “collaboration” many interactions between teacher and student. For example, in classroom interactions, teachers have the right to make negative evaluations of high-school students’ responses to questions posed to them, and routinely do so (Sinclair & Coulthard, 1975); however, students rarely have the right to criticise teachers’ ways of interacting with them, at least i

 Michael J. Baker face-to-face interactions4. Similarly, according to the definitions proposed here, in work situations, most face-to-face interactions between manager and employee cannot be characterised as cases of collaboration (although managers may often speak of their “collaborators”, employees do not usually describe their managers in the same way) given asymmetry of rights between participants. Collaboration, here, therefore refers to an interaction between persons having equal statuses and rights in the interaction, who are not necessarily equals in other respects. Secondly, group work is usually organised by requiring the groups to work on, and hand in to the teacher, a single shared production or solution to the problem they are set. This is a means for ‘engineering’ the need to work together, although the design of effective collaboration situations requires developing tasks whose achievement makes it actually necessary to work together, given that the problem can not be solved alone. Reasons for organising situations of group work are not only related to supposed efficiency in learning, in comparison to working alone. From a developmental point of view, it is social action in groups that is primary, with working alone being a particular and derivative case. Going further in this direction, Crook (2013) has argued that the desire to ‘share’, to achieve ‘mutuality’ is a basic and defining drive of human beings; being motivated to ‘share’ our experiences with others, and sometimes taking pleasure in this for its own sake, is part of what it means to be human, and not only a more or less efficient strategy for achieving a task. Indeed, the outcomes that students report of having engaged in cooperative work go beyond considerations of learning of taught content, to include increased self-esteem and liking of school (Slavin, 1989). Thirdly, not all ‘group work’ is either cooperative or collaborative. This point requires further definition of cooperation and collaboration (see below); but what it basically means is that when students are in a ‘group work’ situation, they are assumed to share the goal of arriving at a shared solution (see point two above), i.e. one on which they all agree (although this may turn out to be impossible). However, when students are in a group work situation (either face to face or at a distance), for a given duration (say, more or less one hour), there will be periods during which they are not attending to each other or to a joint task focus, with each student working individually on a related subtask; in which case, the students can not be said to be collaborating during those periods. This means that the term collaboration will most likely only be applicable to certain specific phases of group work; and identifying such phases – that, by hypothesis, relate to learning . In many contemporary universities, students are given the right to criticise their teachers’ actions, but this is usually done outside classroom social interaction, using questionnaires. I am grateful to a reviewer for having reminded me of this point

Collaboration in collaborative learning  outcomes – requires a strong theory of collaborative activity. An important corollary of this point is that collaboration presupposes a high degree of joint attention (e.g. to a shared tangible object relating to the task, to an aspect of the problem) and a mostly synchronous interaction. I shall return to this point later. Fourthly, an important characteristic of collaborative learning situations is the extent to which a known procedure exists for solving the problem. For example, in the case of a school mathematics problem, the solution procedure may be commonly known, and collaboration could therefore concern the way the procedure is applied. But the most ‘collaborative’ situations are those that are largely exploratory, where no clear plan or procedure exists for solving the problem (or, indeed, for organising collaboration). In such situations, the aim will be for students to explore the problem space and in so doing gain deeper conceptual understanding. This is collaboration as “co-elaboration” of knowledge and understanding of the joint problem space (again, see below). Fifthly, and in relation to the previous point, the aim of group work situations in education – at least from the point of their designers (e.g. the teacher) – is often that the students learn, in the sense of co-elaborating and appropriating task-related conceptual understanding, and not only that they reach the correct answer to the given problem. For example, in a task where students are asked to draw diagrams to represent transfers and transformations of energy in simple experimental situations (Tiberghien & Megalakaki, 1995), the main aim was not that students should learn to draw such diagrams for themselves, but rather that, in trying to draw them together, they should gain deeper understanding of the concept of energy. This will mean that collaboration, in CL, is intimately related to the processes of co-elaboration of conceptual understanding and knowledge relating to the task domain. Finally, in most CL situations in the classroom, or via Internet, the role of the teacher obviously differs from one-to-one or whole class situations. The teachers’ roles are principally to create students’ working groups, to organise their work by providing task instructions and educational materials or supports, and to evaluate the students’ work, handed in at the end of the working session. Teachers do not usually intervene in a continuous manner during the work of the groups themselves, because this would be practically difficult (for example with 24 students organised in 8 groups of 3), although they usually do monitor groups occasionally, and intervene to provide help on students’ requests. This contrasts with whole-class work, where teachers are of course usually the “classroom orchestrators”; and real-time teacher monitoring of student groups becomes more possible (although it is not without its difficulties) in the case of online CL (Baker, 2008; Dillenbourg, 2013). In the case where teachers do provide tutoring for groups, this is often proposed and studied in terms of the Vygotskian notion of “scaffolding”

 Michael J. Baker where a more capable person provides indirect support for a less capable person’s problem-solving (Woods, Bruner & Ross, 1978), within the latter’s “zone of proximal development” (Vygotsky, 1978). Each of the possible and usual roles for the teacher in CL just mentioned – creating, organising and evaluating student groups – has given rise to extensive research, which can only be mentioned briefly here. Theoretically, at least, teachers could create groups of students on the basis of any of the conditions that are known to influence CL mentioned above (e.g. differences in individual participants’ prior knowledge or competence, gender differences, group size, interpersonal relationships, etc.). But in educational practice, this is difficult to put into effect: in the 21st century, in Europe, teachers usually allow students who want to sit near each other to do so5, carrying out ‘fine-tuning’ of seating arrangements during the year; thus groups are usually organised simply in terms of spatial proximity (students work with others sitting next to them). Another common approach is to create “friendship pairs” (Jones & Issroff, 2005), on the basis that students who already know each other will devote less effort to regulating the interpersonal relationship, and thus be able to expend more effort on achieving the task. Quignard (2000) has demonstrated mathematically that optimising the creation of sets of groups within a class (e.g. 6 groups of 2, from 12 students) according to criteria such as differences between students’ task-related conceptualisations, is a complex optimisation problem, for which there is not necessarily a single good solution. In practice, therefore, creating optimal groups for CL is a difficult and practice-based matter. Turning to the question of the organisation of how students’ group work should proceed, this is often left open in educational practice: students are given instructions on a problem to be solved, together; and how they should work together is not defined by the teacher. Some experimental work has, however, led to proposals for both organising collaborative work into specific phases and for prescribing how collaborative dialogue should be performed. In the former category, for example, the “jigsaw method” (Aronson et al., 1987) aims to create positive interdependence between students, by dividing up responsibilities for achieving elements of a task (cf. the discussion of cooperation, below), and asking students to then present and pool the knowledge they have acquired individually. Computer interfaces provide concrete means for organising how collaboration will proceed; and, in CSCL research, this has given rise to a subfield of research on “scripting” collaboration (Fischer et al., 2007; see below in this paper) for favouring learning. . According to the author’s personal experience, in England and in France, at least 40 years ago, students in class were organised in ranks of rows of desks, according to academic ability, with the ‘good students’ at the front of the class near the teacher

Collaboration in collaborative learning  With respect to the organisation of collaborative dialogue itself (see the discussion of forms of cooperation, below), proposals have been made for defining a set of “ground rules” for effective CL (Mercer, Wegerif & Dawes, 1999): for example, students should listen to each others’ proposals, be fair in their criticisms, etc. How to evaluate students’ collaborative work, in a way that encourages productive collaboration, is a thorny issue in educational research and practice. Providing feedback to students on their progress is an integral part of teaching; but there is a paradox here: on the one hand, teachers need to evaluate individual students’ abilities (that is a societal choice), but this can not be done if evaluation concerns only the product of collaboration; on the other hand, evaluating individual contributions to collaborative work emphasises individual contributions, possibly to the detriment of collaboration itself (see below). Collaboration is not a mere juxtaposition or collation of individual efforts, so, if collaboration has occurred, then it will be difficult to evaluate individual contributions from the joint output. Teachers usually opt for a combination of individual and group evaluation (evaluating individual progress, on the basis of individual tests following collaboration, as well as the quality of the collaborative product). On the basis of extensive metareviews of CL research (Slavin, 1983), a clear result emerged: cooperative learning is most effective when the task to be achieved is not subdivided into sub-tasks distributed across participants (i.e. as in the case of “cooperation”, as defined below) and when evaluation (feedback) is given to the group as a whole on the basis of (the average of) the cognitive progress of individual group members. The main points made above are not absolute definitions of group work, cooperation and collaboration in every type of situation: they are defining characteristics of such situations as they are studied in CL research, and as such the limit the scope of the model of collaboration sketched out here. . Collaboration, cooperation, collective activity and coordination The definition of collaboration proposed by Roschelle and Teasley (1995) has become generally accepted in the field of CL (e.g. Dillenbourg, 1999b), and has given rise to several extensions that will be discussed forthwith. The initial definition given by Roschelle and Teasley (ibid.) is as follows: Collaboration is a coordinated, synchronous activity that is the result of a continued attempt to construct and maintain a shared conception of a problem. We make a distinction between ‘collaborative’ versus ‘cooperative’ problem solving. Cooperative work is accomplished by the division of labour among participants, as an activity where each person is responsible for a portion of the problem solving. We focus on collaboration as the mutual engagement of participants in a coordinated effort to solve the problem together. (p. 70

 Michael J. Baker To cooperate means at least to share a common goal (or one that is assumed to be shared, such as building a model of the Eiffel Tower with Lego™), towards whose achievement each participant in the group will strive. But this is compatible with dividing up the task into subtasks and assigning individual (or subgroup) responsibilities for achieving each of them (e.g. “you make the plan, you others select the bricks, and I’ll build the tower”). To collaborate means at least to cooperate (in the sense of pursuing a goal that is assumed to be shared), but also to go further than this, in working together in a more or less synchronous way, in order to gain a shared understanding of the task. In this sense, cooperation is a more general concept and phenomenon than collaboration. Collaboration is a specific form of cooperation: cooperation works on the level of tasks and actions, collaboration works on the plane of ideas, understanding, representations. The (invented) example of three students (X, Y and Z) writing a short joint project report on flora and fauna in their local park will help to clarify this distinction between cooperation and collaboration. Students could cooperate on this joint task, in the sense of working towards the shared goal of producing the report by dividing up responsibilities for achieving subtasks: for example, “you, Y, write up the data; you, Z write the references and describe the park; I, X, will write the introduction and conclusion”. Or they could collaborate, in the sense of studying the park, analysing data, writing the report together, side by side, from beginning to end, discussing as they go along, with respect to what they are trying to do, how they should do it and what is meant by elements of the task (such as “flora”, “the park”, “the report”). It should be noted that this distinction between cooperation and collaboration corresponds broadly to ordinary usage (although the nuance between the meanings of the two words in the English language is often slight). This does not mean that these definitions are universally correct, and in any case the aim here is to develop precise scientific meanings for these terms. Rather, it gives some indication that the definitions are not completely spurious. Consider the tragic example of country Alpha invaded and occupied by the armies of country Beta. People from Alpha who ‘work with’ the enemy Beta in some way are not usually accused using the pejorative term “cooperator!”, but are rather decried using the term “collaborator!”. This confirms that what people see as reprehensible is not so much that others have “cooperated”, in the sense of having performed certain actions corresponding to the enemy’s goals or orders, probably under duress; but rather that they had “collaborated” with the enemy, in the sense of having actively shared and participated in developing the enemy’s system of ideas and values (ideology), thereby going beyond what is minimally necessary (i.e. cooperation). This is in alignment with the definition of collaboration as an active and joint process of elaboration on an ideational plane. Notwithstanding the negative example o

Collaboration in collaborative learning  collaboration mentioned above, it is probably true to say that collaboration is usually connoted positively, as a ‘good thing’, despite well-known problems that can occur in students’ group work, such as demotivation, exclusion and even interpersonal aggression (Baker, Bernard & Dumez-Féroc, 2012). Figure 1 shows an example of collaboration, taken from a corpus of interactions recorded in a high school physics classroom6, where the students (each 17 years old), working in pairs, had been asked to identify the forces acting on a stone, which has been suspended by a string on a support (in the photograph taken from a video recording reproduced in Figure 1, student A is to the left and student B to the right).
